INTRODUCTION

My approach in this study has been set on its way by my unfinished encounter with the thought of Martin Heidegger. I came to that thought through my study of hermeneutics, itself a consequence of questions raised in Professor Faruk's Metode Penelitian Sastra course. Heidegger is credited with transforming hermeneutics from an 'objectivist' search for a science of textual interpretation into a concern with interpretation more broadly conceived as a basic structure of human being; on this view, any 'hermenutics' as 'theory of interpretation' would ultimately derive from interpretation understood existentially (Bleicher 100). Heidegger undertakes the 'existential analytic' of human being as Dasein or being-there in *Being and Time* with the goal of discovering a 'fundamental ontology'; his exposition of understanding and interpretation in that text is then a part of a broader effort that is not specifically hermeneutically concerned. It falls to his student, Hans-Georg Gadamer, to apply this insight more concretely to issues of interpretation in the human sciences. It is thus Gadamer and the early Heidegger who form the basis of the 'methodological' reflections which precede my analysis.

From Gadamer I found myself drawn back to Heidegger, this time the later thought of the work of art, technology, and epochal presencing. If the earlier, 'heremeneutic' thought gave a strong 'methodological' orientation, this later thought provides the key for understanding *Arus Balik* as a 'transitional' text.

It could be objected from the beginning, why bring Heidegger, the thinker of the destiny of the West, into such a foreign context? Indeed, academics in Indonesia often encounter such questions, in various degrees of refinement. The crude version regards identifies everything with its origin in Europe or the West as 'colonial'. Against the colonial stands the 'indigenous' or the 'Eastern', identified with a kind of pre-modern 'tradition' that may or may not include Islam and various indigenous practices which somehow transcend and rebut the rationalism and the rational. In this (frequently Orientalist form), the objection need not be taken too seriously. It gains some force when its focus narrows and specifically takes as its object the Enlightenment as the moment in European intellectual history at which certain values, chief among them reason as an emancipatory force capable of both critiquing unjust traditional social structures and discovering. universally valid ethical principles. As has been variously noted, the birth of this intellectual project corresponded with the the rise of European coloniality*. In this reading, the entire Western philosophical tradition becomes suspect as the question of the extent that that tradition presupposes, gives rise to, allows, or supports coloniality is justly posed. Our reading of the confluence of Western philosophy and coloniality determines the validity of Heidegger and Gadamer's 'entry' into the Indonesian cultural sphere.

On the one hand, we can read both Heidegger and Gadamer as some of the Enlightenment's strongest critics. Gadamer regards the Enlightenment's defining "prejudice against prejudice" (TM 284) as a source of error that denies the possibility truth emerging from a tradition which in fact constitutes us and our horizon (289). Heidegger goes even further with his critique of the modern metaphysics of the subject inaugurated by Descartes as inherently dominating, as "assault" and "grasping" (HW 100). On the other hand, the colonial problem seems never to occur to Gadamer, and we can find references in both of their writings that imply an Orientalist prejudice. There is no doubt that both Heidegger and Gadamer think through and about the Western philosophical and cultural tradition, but this is no reason for us to leave their thought within their respective horizons. Among others, Homi K. Bhabha makes approving use of Heidegger in his work, and Enrique Dussel describes the "late Heidegger" as the point of departure for Liberation Philosophy (Bhabha 1, Dussel 3).

Additionally, I wish to cite my own experience. Though I began reading Heidegger seriously only as a background stepping stone towards what struck me at that time as the more contemporarily relevant thinking of Gadamer, Habermas, Ricouer, and their even more recent interlocutors, I was doubly struck: first by the depth of Heidegger's insight, and second by how this insight seemed to never have caught up to us and the way we practice the human sciences. So much of the way we think and talk about literary texts suddenly struck me as 'pre-Heideggerian'. As such, I don't view Heidegger (as "discursive regularity" (Sch\"urmann 3), not as 'man) as a mere choice from among other 'theoretical' approaches: Lacanian, Deleuzian, Bourdeusian, etc. Rather, I understand Heidegger's thought as something essential, something that we must pass through and reckon with, regardless of whatever position we eventually take. toward it.

Heidegger thought the unfolding of the logos in the West from its origin in the Greeks to its metastasis in the technological age of today. He never explicitly raised the issue of the colonial, but he was aware of the global reach of the history of being, "QUOTE FROM WHAT IS CALLED THINKING". Oe could argue that his thinking encompasses coloniality without considering it directlya. The European colonization would then be the precondition of the technologization of the world that was only just beginning when Heidegger wrote, at the same time as the concrete colonial project was losing steam. The problems of the West as put forth by Heidegger are global problems, our problems, wherever in the world we find ourselves, and not merely incidentally. We study in a university in Yogyakarta the institutional and disciplinary structure of which is modeled after the European university. The very terms that orient our research here -- teori, metode, -logi -- are of course Greek. How are we to understand these terms here, today? Do we take them up only in the sense of their common understanding, or do we think them, along with Heidegger and Gadamer, to their Greek origins? My understanding ide of their interpretation has made somewhat problematic the standard division of a thesis into "Theory, Methodology, Analysis, Conclusion", though in many respects this thesis does follow that framework.

This thesis is not a 'Heideggerian' interpretation of Arus Balik, but rather an interpretation of Arus Balik for which Heidegger's (and Gadamer's) thought have served as necessary preparation, or perhaps orientation. The goal is not to force the text of Pramoedya's novel into a Heideggerian frame, thereby doing violence to it. Rather, Heidegger and Gadamer have served to clear the ground in order that Pramoedya's text might speak to us, either renewed or for the first time. Pramoedya should here be understood as a poet and thinker, one of "the few" receptive to the call of Being, not as the mere writer of stories that a traditional literary-critical reading would make him. I hereby release the success or failure of that interpretation into the hands of my readers.
