
HERMENEUTICS AND THE PROBLEM OF METHODOLOGY
MARTIN HEIDEGGER
HEIDEGGER AND EARLIER HERMENEUTICS

I follow Josef Bleicher in defining hermeneutics most generally as "the theory or philosophy of the interpretation of meaning" (1). Its name cames from the ancient Greek god Hermes, who not only transmitted the messages of the gods to humans but also interpreted them (11). Thus from the name of the discipline alone we encounter two hermeneutic assumptions: (1) the meaning of a text is not necessarily self-evident but requires an interpretative act to be understood, and (2) the medium by which a message comes down to us, either divinely or historically, is not necessarily trustworthy. As Gadamer tells us, the first modern hermeneutics, that of Friedrich Schleiermacher, is negatively oriented in this way, focusing specifically on the avoidance of misunderstanding (TM 191). Both Schleiermacher and his successor, Wilhelm Dilthey, envisioned hermeneutics as a methodological praxis. For Dilthey, hermeneutics would serve as a foundation for the *Geisteswissenschaften* or human sciences in the same way that the scientific method founded the natural sciences (Bleicher 1). The natural and human sciences would then be on equal epistemological footing. A corollary to this grounding is Dilthey's idea of 'universal history'; research in historical science, hermeneutically grounded, would proceed in a cumulative fashion, steadily building up facts. This process would eventually lead to a sense of historical context wide enough that all of history could be viewed objectively, as if one were standing outside of it (234). Heidegger's rethinking of interpretation in *Being and Time* fundamentally altered the course of hermeneutics in the 20th century*.In order to understand Heidegger's "hermeneutics", it is necessary to lay out some aspects of his general philosophical project in *Being and Time*. The following exposition of that text is by no means exhaustive; its primary purpose is to render comprehensible Heidegger's concepts of "understanding" and "interpretation", as well as their implications, for a reader unfamiliar with his thought.

THE QUESTION OF THE MEANING OF BEING
 Heidegger begins what many consider his magnum opus with a quote from Plato's Sophist 244A, which he translates as follows: "For manifestly you have long been aware of what you mean when you use the expression "*being*" We, however, who used to think we understood it, have now become perplexed" (BT 1). From the outset we encounter in this choice of epigraph not only Heidegger's overriding philosophical concern -- the meaning of Being -- but also a sense of the context from which that concern arises. Heidegger's text, when it criticizes, focuses on modern philosophy, explicitly Descartes but also, implicitly, Husserl. Nevertheless, Heidegger wishes here to engage not only the thinking of his own milieu but also the entirety of the Western philosophical tradition, from the ancient Greeks onward (Sch\"urmann, HBT 58). And that entire tradition speaks of ignorance, of forgetting. The characters in Plato's dialogue may not be able to say what they mean by 'being', but we moderns are no better: "Do we in our time have an answer to the question of what we really mean by the word 'being'? Not at all" "Haben wir heute eine Antwort auf die Frage nach dem, was wir mit dem Wort >>seiend<< eigentlich meinen? Keineswegs" (SZ 1). Beginning from that ignorance, the goal of *Being and Time* is then the retrieval of the question of the meaning of Being (die Frage nach dem Sinn von Sein) (ibid.)

'Meaning' here should not be understood as a denotative definition, which would be indicated by the German *Bedeutung*. Rather, the word here is 'Sinn', closer to the English 'sense' (it is not yet clear to me to what extent the Indonesian makna/arti reflects or departa from Enlish sense/reference and German Sinn/Bedeutung). Being cannot be defined denotatively. The 'why' of this inability brings us to a central point in Heidegger, what he will later call the 'ontological difference': there are beings (Seiendes, literally, 'that which is') and there is Being (Sein, the verbal infinitive, 'to be'). Anything that is -- a chair, a dog, a person, a place, a community, an idea -- is a being (or 'entity' in Macquarrie and Robinson's translation). Being, on the other hand, is the Being of beings, "that which determines entities as entities, that on the basis of which entities are already understood" "das, was Seiendes als Seindes bestimmt, das, woraufhin Seindes, mag es wie immer er\"ortert werden, je schon verstanden ist" (SZ 6).
Richardson, in an alternate formulation, (4) writes that Being in this sense as "that by which that which is is", the "unity ... which renders possible all "is"". We can also conceive of the ontological difference by analogy with light: we can only see objects by virtue of the light reflecting off of their surfaces. In every case what we see is light, but the light 'itself' always conceals itself in the form of the objects off of which it reflects. Asking after Being is like asking after light (5). Linguistically, the term 'ontic' and its derivates refer to beings/entities, while 'ontological' refers to the Being of those entities.

Being is not some nebulous 'stuff' out of which beings are made. Nor, to forestall an easy misreading, is it God. "Being," Heidegger tells us, "is always the Being of an entity" ("Sein ist jeweils das Sein eines Seienden") (SZ 9) -- that is, we cannot encounter or conceive of Being separately from some being -- but Being is different from beings. Any attempt to define Being would be to speak of it as if it were a being (or as a "class or genus of beings" (4). At the same time, our only access to Being is through beings. A 'metaphysical' (meta = beyond, phusis = that which presents itself) move or 'leap' beyond beings is thus necessary to reach Being (Richardson 4-5), "the transcendens pure and simple" "das transcendens schlechthin" (SZ 38). *Being and Time* is an inquiry which attempts this leap or this transcendence. The formal structure of a queston, according to Heidegger, has three parts: "what is asked about" (das Gefragte), "what is interrogated" (das Befragte), and "what is to be found out (das Erfragte) (SZ 5). In the question of the meaning of being, Being is what is asked about, through the intterogation of beings, in order to find out the meaning of Being. The question then arises, what being or beings are to be interrogated? The answer is Dasein.

DASEIN
Dasein is Heidegger's term for human being and is usually left untranslated in translations of his writings as well as in the secondary literature. 'Dasein' in standard German means existence. Hyphenated into its constituent parts, as Da-sein (a punctuation Heidegger frequently makes), it means literally "there-being" or "being-there". We can understand this choice of terminology in both a negative and a positive sense. Negatively, Dasein represents a rejection of all the terms for human being inherited from the philosophical tradition, among them "the *ego cogito* of Descartes, the subject, the "I", reason, spirit," and "person" (BT 22). This entire tradition has been one long forgetting of the question of the meaning of Being, to the extent that thinking within its categories will prevent us from even asking the question of Being, let alone finding its answer: "The question of Being does not achieve its true concreteness until we have carried through the process of destroying the ontological tradition" (26). In *The Basic Problems of Phenomenology*, Heidegger emphasizes that this 'destruction' (*Destruktion*) is not mere wrecking but rather *Abbau*, deconstruction, a dismantling (GA 24 31, tr.23). More specifically, each of the inherited terms carries its own philosophical baggage. As Sch\"urmann explains, ""Rational animal" thematizes man as a certain type of substance differentiated by reason" while ""ego" thematizes man as a certain unity of functions and thus no longer as a substance, a thing" (HBT 72). 'Negatively', then, the term Dasein itself is part of the process of the deconstruction of the ontological tradition.  Positively, expressing human being as being-there seems also to express something fundamental about our experience of our own Being, as emerges in the existential analytic of Dasein with which the vast majority of the text of *Being and Time* is occupied.

Heidegger first describes Dasein as "that entity which each of us is himself and which includes inquiring as one of the possibilities of its Being" "Dieses Seinde, das wir selbst je sind und das unter anderem die Seinsm\"oglichkeit des Fragens hat" (7). Dasein is distinguished from other beings because Dasein questions. That which Dasein questions is Being itself. This 'questioning' is not merely one activity among others but rather is a basic way in which Dasein is; Dasein "is ontically distinguished by the fact that, in its very Being, that Being is an *issue* for it ... Dasein *is* ontological[ly]" (12). This ontological orientation makes Dasein unique among beings. A dog is not existentially oriented to Being in this way, letalone a rock. It is important to note that to say that Dasein "is ontologically" is not the same as to say that Dasein formulates an ontology in the sense of an explicit philosophy. That kind of philosophizing is in fact one ontic activity among others. To say that Dasein is ontologically rather indicates a kind of primordial openness to Being for which Heidegger alternately suggests the label "pre-ontological". Dasein always already has a kind of vague pre-understanding of Being; without it we would never be able to make or understand any proposition that contains or implies the verb "to be". This special relationship to Being is what makes Dasein the being that is to be interrogated. The 'existential analytic' of Dasein -- that is, the explicit working-out of the existential structures of which Dasein already has a provisional understanding -- is a precondition for the uncovering of a "fundamental ontology" (13). Although the vast majority of the text of *Being and Time* concerns this existential analytic, we must remember that *Being Time* is not merely a work of philosophical anthropology, that its goal is rather an ontology.

THE WORLD
Heidegger writes that "being in a world is something that belongs essentially" to Dasen (13). He defines 'world' ontically as "that *wherein* a factical Dasein as such can be said to live" (65). At the same time, ontologically, the world is not something outside of and surrounding Dasein but "is rather a characteristic of Dasein itself" (64). This apparent contradiction between the ontic and ontological understandings of world in fact reveals something profound. First of all, Heidegger is not saying that a human, considered as an organism, requires certain things to exist -- air, water, food, shelter, etc. -- that are furnished by the world in which she lives. World is not the earth or nature; in fact, nature itself is "an entity which is encountered within the world" (63). World is also not the same as our spatial environment considered in the abstract. What, then, is world? We can gain a sense of the positive meaning of this "wherein" through an exploration of how we encounter things in the world, namely as 'equipment', Zeug.

In our everyday existence, we encounter things primarily as equipment, that is, something that we use, can use, or wish to use but cannot (because it is broken, unavailable, or whatever). In this way, things concern us. A pen, for example, appears to us primarily as something with which to write. Equipment thus has the structure of 'in-order-to' (um zu). This in-order-to structure also links the 'piece' of equipment referentially with other things; it does not occur alone, in itself (68). The pen, for example, implies a desk and paper on which to write, a chair on which to sit, a room in which these things are found, etc. It also implies a factory in which it was produced, a truck in which it was shipped, the store in which I bought it or the friend who loaned it to me--  in short, a referential totality of things and social relations. The manner of Dasein's concern with equipment is not the same for each individual Dasein. For me, the pen appears first and primarily as something to write with, but that will not be the case for a worker in the pen factory or in the store where I bought the pen. Equipment has a special way of being called Zuhandenheit or "readiness-to-hand" (in Macquarrie and Robinson''s translation). Thus another name for equipment is Zuhandenes, the ready-to-hand. That which is the ready-to-hand has the character of withdrawing itself so that the work on which we are really focused can appear (70). An example will help to make this point clear.

When I am writing something, I am not particularly aware of the pen as an object made of plastic, or the paper on which I write as a sheet of processed tree-fiber, or the desk at which I sit; my focus is on the act of writing itself. The referentially-linked totality of pen-paper-desk-chair-lamp-room-etc. appears to me at that moment as 'equipment for writing'. In fact, they only emerge for me as individuated objects if something breaks and the referential totality is thus disrupted (73). If my pen suddenly runs dry, it becomes for me an inert lump of plastic, divested of the context which hitherto made it meaningful for me. It becomes vorhanden, merely "present-at-hand". Even in the context of my example, though, the pen is present-at-hand as a deficient mode of readiness-to-hand; it is something that *should* be ready-to-hand, and I want to replace its ink, or replace the pen, in order to return to my work. The referential totality of functional equipment constitutes the world, and my Being-in-the-World as Dasein is primarily absorption in this totality (76-7). Presence-at-hand, by contrast, is a derivative mode of being: "To the extent that any *entity* shows itself to concern--that is, to the extent that it is discovered in its Being--it is already something ready-to-hand environmentally; it just is not 'proximally' a 'world-stuff' that is merely present-at-hand" (85). In other words, the priority of readiness-to-hand is not a choice of emphasis, one way of viewing the world among others, or a prescription as to how we should experience the world, but rather a phenomenological fact.

One of Heidegger's major points in *Being and Time* concerns this priority of the ready-to-hand that much philosophical and scientific questioning tends to obscure. The mode of being of the object of scientific* inquiry is presence at hand. Heidegger is not staking out an anti-science position here. The theoretical placing of objects before our gaze as present-at-hand is necessary and justified within its proper sphere. The problem that we face in modernity is that the 'way of seeing' of the present-hand has not only become our primary means of understanding the world; the correlation between an assertion and a present-at-hand object has been identified with 'truth'. Simon Critchley is quite eloquent on this point:
"the natural attitude, with its theoreticist, intellectualist, *vorhanden* understanding of reality and consciousness is an unphenomenological distortion of the human being's primary practical and personal access to the world" (Critcley 42), and, even more emphatically, "the question of the meaning and value of life in the world is not reducible to empirical inquiry" (48).

UNDERSTANDING AND INTERPRETATION
We usually think of understanding (which in English has a relationship of descent with Heidegger's German term, *verstehen*) as a cognitive act or ability. To say that "I understand X" means I've integrated my knowledge of it into my general knowledge, that I'm familiar with it, knowing well its structure in-itself as well as its meaning in the context of other things.  Heidegger agrees with this notion of understanding in an everyday, ontic sense. But understanding is also for Heidegger an 'existensiale', that is, "a basic mode of Dasein's Being" (143). As long as Dasein is, Dasein understands; in a corollary to Dasein's ontological priority above, we can observa also that Dasein is hermeneutical[ly] (Sch\"urmann  HBT 73). This existential understanding is related to 'projection' (Entwurf), another existensiale, by which Dasein orients itself to definite possibilities of its Being. Neither understanding nor projection here are to be understood as conscious ('thematic') planning or grasping. They are not choices. Because of projection, Dasein always 'is more than it factically is'; that is, aside from its concrete existence at any given moment Dasein also exists as potential, projecting itself onto future possibility. Through projection Dasein always understands itself in terms of those possibilities (BT 145)

In another reversal from common terminology, Heidegger defines interpretation (Auslegung) as the "self-development of the understanding" (148). Traditionally, this order is reversed. When faced with something we don't understand, we work to interpret it, to produce an interpretation. Through the interpretation we come to an understanding. For Heidegger, on the other hand, we cannot interpret something we haven't already understood.
Interpretation occurs with something that is ready-to-hand and always via an 'as-structure' related to the referential totality: we see something *as* a chair (something for sitting), *as* a table (something for writing, typing, holding things), *as* a pen (something to write with). Interpretation need not take the form of a conscious assertion; because understanding functions on an existential level, it is something we are constantly doing, or that is constantly happening to us. Both understanding and interpretation then precede the making of an assertion about a thing. On this view, the theoretical gaze that we apply to the present-at-hand is not an aid to understanding but a failure:

"When we have to do with anything, the mere seeing of the Things which are closest to us bears in itself the structure of interpretation, and in so primordial a manner that just to grasp something *free*, as it were, *of the "as"*, requires a certain readjustment. when we merely stare at something, our just-having-it-before-us lies before us *as a failure to understand it any more*. this grasping which is free of the "as", is a privation of the kind of seeing in which one *merely* understands. it is not more primordial than that kind of seeing, but is derived from it. If the 'as' is ontically unexpressed, this must not seduce us into overlooking it as a constitutive state for understanding, existential and a priori" (149)

Interpretation is also not a second-order phenomena, by which I first perceive something sensually and then 'apply' an interpretation in the form of an 'as' to it. The involvement of a thing in the referential totality precedes our perception. There is no moment where we perceive it not as that (150).

This account stands in stark opposition to earlier hermeneutics' goal of a universal and objective methodology for interpretation. Heidegger rejects the possibility of such a goal, along with the possibility of "presuppositionless apprehending": "If, when one is engaged in a particular concrete kind of interpretation, in the sense of exact textual Interpretation, one likes to appeal to what 'stands there', then one finds that what 'stands there' in the first instance is nothing other than the obvious undiscussed assumption of the person who does the interpreting" (ibid). The role of assumptions (prejudice) in interpretation will be elaborated by Gadamer.

Through interpretation, we say that a being has 'sense' or 'meaning' (Sinn), but it is the entity itself that is understood, not its meaning. Meaning is a property of Dasein, not the thing Dasein interprets. Specifically, it is "the "upon-which" of a projection in terms of which something becomes intelligible as something ... the formal-existential framework of the disclosedness which belongs to understanding" (151). The implications for Heidegger's search for fundamental ontology are that the meaning of Being will not be something deep pulled from 'behind' being but rather something convering "Being itself in so far as Being enters into the intelligibility of Dasein" (152).

Interpretation will perhaps become clearer via a contrast with assertion (Aussage (Stambaugh: 'Statement')) Just as interpretation is derivative of understanding, assertion is derivative of interpretation. Heidegger identfies three significations of assertion, all three of which contribute to one unitary definition. First, assertion is a 'pointing out' (Aufzeigen) in the sense of letting something be seen. For example, when I assert that "the hammer is too heavy", the hammer comes into view. However, the structure of the assertion is such that only a specific aspect of the hammer comes into view, in this case its heaviness. This 'narrowing' or 'restriction refers to the second signification of assertion, namely as 'predication'. In predication, a subject (in this case the hammer) is given a definite character, heaviness (154). Finally, assertion is communication (Mitteilung). This is assertion's social aspect in that in asserting others can also see what is defined and pointed out (155).  These three aspects combine to produce a definition of assertion as "a pointing-out which gives something a definite character and which communicates" (156).

Three points regarding assertion deserve emphasis. First, assertion is not the primary or first means by which something is disclosed to Dasein; it is ontologically dependent on a preunderstanding of the 'subject' of the assertion. In fact, interpretation often takes place without any verbalized assertion: it "is carried out primordially not in a theoretical statement but in an action of circumspective concern--laying aside the unsuitbale tool, or exchanging it, 'without wasting words'" (157). Second, a theoretical assertion about something transforms it from something ready-to-hand, that is, connected referentially to a world in which we are involved, to something merely present at hand, an object of our gaze and knowledge. In other words, viewing an object in this way implies a separation from its context. This shift can also be thought of as a change in the 'as-structure', from the 'existential-hermeneutical as' to the 'apophantic as'. This shift is not incidental but is in fact "the specialty of assertion" (158). Finally, we can understand 'pure' interpretation and 'pure' assertion as two poles between which most of Dasein's day-to-day Being falls, rather than as two mutually exclusive possibilities.

If all understanding is pre-understanding, then interpretation is a circular process. The concept of the 'hermeneutic circle' does not begin with Heidegger, but he does give it a new sense. In Schleiermacher's hermeneutics, it refers to the necessity that the interpreter move back and forth between part and whole in order to understand a text. An unclear part of the text can be explained with the reference to the whole, but the whole itself is constituted by those parts. This back-and-forth motion and its attendant uncertainty could, according to Schleiermacher, be overcome by the 'divinatory' act of occupying the mind of the author (Gadamer 304). Heidegger transfers the the circle from the methodological to the ontological sphere: the back-and-forth of interpretation no longer moves between part and whole but between pre-understanding and what is understood. Earlier hermeneutics saw this groundless circular movement of interpretation as a vicious circle that prevented the human sciences from achieving their proper sovereignty, but for Heidegger is is precisely this circular motion which is constitutive of understanding at all (305). . Thus, "what is decisive is not to get out of the circle but to come into it in the right way", since "in the circle is hidden a positive possibility of the most primordial kind of knowing"; such knowing depends on "never [allowing] our fore-having, fore-sight, and fore-conception to be presented to us by fancies and populare conceptions, but rather to make the scientific theme secure by working out these fore-structures in terms of the things themselves" (BT 153). At this point we've gone as far as Heidegger the hermeneut is willing to take us. Our exposition will continue with Heidegger's student Gadamer.

*It should be noted that the methodologically oriented strand of 'hermeneutical theory' was carried on into the 20th century by Emilio Betti, in which that approach attains its "most sophisticated exposition" (Bleicher 97). His work lies outside the scope of the present study.

*"Wissenchaft", thus not only the natural sciences but also the Geisteswissenschaften: literature, history, etc.

