HANS-GEORG GADAMER
We can best examine Gadamer's hermeneutics in the light of his critique of two forms of alienating modern consciousness, aesthetic consciousness and historical consciousness, and the hermeneutic consciousness he offers in their place. Hermeneutics for Gadamer is not a methodology but "a theory of the real experience that thinking is" (TM xxxiii) based on the radical finitude of human experience and understanding.

AESTHETIC CONSCIOUSNESS AS ALIENATION
Aesthetic consciousness has two major philosophical predecessors: Immanuel Kant and Romanticism. In brief, Kant held that beauty pleases non-conceptually; aesthetic appreciation is a matter of the free, disinterested play of our senses over beautiful objects. This 'move' of Kant's separates art from the ethical and from social reality (37). Romanticism inherited and reinterpreted this separation: the realm of the aeshetic was viewed as superior to the moral or political, having its own quasi-spiritual value (75). Even though Kantianism and Romanticism no longer persist as explicitly espoused ideologies, this way of viewing art has become very much the norm. Regardless of the various discourses of social relevance, a piece of art is still evaluated primarily formally, on the basis of its 'aesthetic quality'. Aspects such as purpose, function, or significance of content are deemphasized or ignored entirely. Art considered only aesthetically becomes closed off in its own world. We experience concurrently a flattening of history, in which every era is equally 'available' but is thought only as a style (78). We can see this phenomenon at work in museums, 'temples to art' in which anything can be laid side by side.

In Heideggerian terms, Gadamer regards aesthetic consciousness generally as a result of a privileging of the present-at-hand ('perception' as  physical stimulus) over the ready-to-hand (the 'as-structure' as outlined above). There is no 'pure perception' which is afterward interpreted to be this or that thing; the leaves of the trees outside the window where I write are, for me, first of all trees and only secondly arrangements of green and brown. As Gadamer writes, "pure seeing and pure hearing are dogmatic abstraction that artificially reduce phenomena. Perception always includes meaning" (84). The primacy of the as-structure of interpretation is a fairly obvious point in the case of representational art, but it holds true for abstract art as well. For example,  we can imagine the a painting that consists of one shade of one color covering the entire canvas with no visible brushstrokes (eg the work of Yves Klein). One can, of course, approach such a painting as an invitation to contemplate the color as a color. Such contemplation would require a theoretical 'step out' of our normal Being-in-the-World, that is, a bracketing of our concern with things. Regardless of the possible merits of such an approach, it must be regarded as artificial or derivative from primary experience insofar as it is an approach that must be learned. It may be valid as one way of looking at art but it should not be taken as the sole, primary, or best way. Furthermore, we have always already encountered the painging as a piece of art already embedded in a meaningful context which conditions our approach the painting not only as a single work encountered alone but also as a piece of the history of art generally, painted at a particular time, in a particular place, in reaction both to artistic and social events there. In fact, historical context is often invoked in order to 'help' someone appreciate a work that at first strikes them as ugly, confusing, or meaningless. More than a mere criticism, though, Gadamer also offers a positive vision of art and aesthetic experience, what he refers to as the ontology of the work of art.

THE ONTOLOGY OF THE WORK OF ART
Gadamer seeks to reclaim art as something meaningful for us, something that broadens our understanding. In opposition to the romantic or aestheticist position, he writes that the work of art:
"is not some alien universe to which we are magically transported for a time. Rather, we learn to understand ourselves in and through it, and this means the we sublate the discontinuity and atomism of isolated experiences in the continuity of our own existence. For this reason, we must adopt a standpoint in relation to art and the beautiful that does not pretend to immediacy but corresponds to the historical nature of the human condition" (88).
From the beginning, then, we see a conception of art that connects us both socially to one another as well as to the past (and, indirectly, the future) via history. One aspect of this condition is a diminishment of subjectivity in the encounter with a work of art. We remember that the Kantian aesthetic paradigm, by privileging perception, implicitly privileges also the perceiving subject for whom the artwork is an object. Gadamer locates the subjectivity of aesthetic experience not in the person encountering the art but rather in the work of art itself. We can understand this reorientation via Gadamer's conception of 'play' and his analogy of the experience of art with the playing of a game.

Play, according to Gadamer, is "the mode of being of the work of art itself" (106). Play in this sense, then, refers neither to the attitude of the creator nor that of the audience. Nevertheless, reference to human play will help us understand what Gadamer precisely means here. When we play a game, there is an interesting convergence of seriousness and non-seriousness. First of all, we know the game is not 'real', and someone who takes the game 'too seriously', for example becoming angry when losing, is denounced as a 'poor sport'. At the same time, a certain level of seriousness is also required: we must respect the rules of the game and make a good-faith effort in order for play to occur. Someone who fails to take the game seriously cannot be said to play at all and in fact ruins the game.  When we play seriously, we 'lose ourselves' in play, and what comes into view is not the clash of me as subject against my opponent, but rather play itself, which only comes into view to the extent that our subjectivity recedes. The same thing is true of our encounter with the work of art, which "has its true being in the fact that it becomes an experience that changes the person who experiences it. The "subject" of the experience of art, that which remains and endures, is not the subjectivity of the person who experiences it but the work itself" (107). We change, but the work persists. We become a kind of medium for the play of the work of art.

Play is also not primarily a human activity. We speak, for example, of the play of light across surface, of waves in the sea, or of the parts of a machine (at least in German and English). Play can thus be most generally defines as "to-and-fro movement that is not tied to any goal that would bring it to an end" (108). We usually regard these 'natural' occurrences of play as metaphorical projections of human play onto the non-human. For Gadamer, inversely, "man *too* plays", in imitating or otherwise responding to nature (109).

The work of art makes a claim on its audience. 'Claim' here is "the legal basis for an unspecified demand" which transcends any historical distance (128). For a Christian or a Muslim, for example, the fact of Christ's death and resurrection or God's revelation of the Qur'an to Muhammad establish claims that are always and irrevocably binding. This claim remains formally empty, however, as long as it is not concretized in a demand. This concretization is, at least in the Christian tradition, accomplished by preaching, which performs an essential mediatory role. In this way the claim is always 'present' to the believer. Understood in this way, merely 'aesthetic' commentary on a work of art would be out of place, amounting to the same thing as commenting on the beauty of a religious ceremony or the eloquence of a sermon. These things are simply beside the point (129). To fail to accept the work's claim to meaning is to treat it as a merely historical document (146).

To somewhat foreshadow the later Heidegger to be discussed below, we can view the claim of art as a counter to the grasping ego: "In the work of art, we experience an absolute opposition to the will-to-control, not in the sense of a rigid resistance to the presumption of our will, which is bent on utilizing things, but in the sense of the superior and intensive power of a being reposing in itself" (Truth 108) It resists merely by being there but not for us, by opening a world but at the same time withdrawing/concealing. This disclosing/concealing is aletheia, the primordial meaning of truth which precedes our day-to-day conception of truth as "correspondence between an assertion and an object at-hand".

Literature shares in the same ontology. It only becomes a "dead remnant" of the past if we read it as a historical document. Rather, world literature "belongs to the "world"" (TM 161). For Gadamer, literature, the medium of which is written language, has a special status among arts. Something miraculous happens when we interpret a literary text, especially one from another time or place, namely "the transformation of something alien and dead into total contemporanaeity and familiarity" (163). This is something that happens uniquely with literature in contrast to any other artifact from the past, like ruins or old tools, all of which are worn down by weather and time. With literature, though, once we learn the language in which it is written, nothing of its 'substance' is lost in that way. For Gadamer "the capacity to read, to understand what is written, is like a secret art, even a magic that frees and binds us ... People who can read what has been handed down in writing produce and achieve the sheer presence of the past" (163).

It is in the sense of both the claim art makes to us and the promise of the non-reductive availability of the past that Gadamer states that "aesthetics has to be absorbed into hermeneutics" (164). Aesthetics as attention to the merely aesthetic deprives art of its meaning, and also deprives us of art's meaning. Hermeneutics is not merely the reconstruction of a work's meaning in its own context; that "would be no more than handing on a dead meaning" (167). We will meet the positive sense of hermeneutics for Gadamer, in his analysis and overcoming of the second, related form of modern alienation, that is, historical consciousness. This understanding of hermeneutics will also help to overcome certain 'methodological' biases connected to how to read a text academically. Gadamer himself gives a thorough account of the intellectual history of hermeneutics up to and including the impact of Heidegger discussed above. We will highlight  the key points here.

HISTORICAL CONSCIOUSNESS AS ALIENATION IN EARLY HERMENEUTICS
Historical consciousness is based on the assumption of the ability to view history objectively, in the same way as a physicist views the natural world (Scope 6). As such, it is linked to the practice of 'traditional' or 'romantic' hermeneutics, which Gadamer identifies as any pre-Heideggerian hermeneutics, i.e. Friedrich Schleiermacher, J.G. Droysen, Wilhelm Dilthey, and other associated thinkers. Hermeneutics in the West emerged specifically in the context of biblical tradition; the Bible somehow understood as the word of God presents an imperative to develop a universally valid praxis of interpretation (Bleicher 12). In the theological sphere, then, the hermeneutic impetus coincides with the Protestant Reformation's championing of the interpretative power of the individual over and against the inherited dogma of the Catholic church. At the same time, a humanist concern with the values of classical culture via its text drove the development of philological hermeneutics. Both of these fields claimed to rediscover the original meanings of the texts they studied, correcting the fossilized errors of tradition (TM 182). Finally, the need for authoritative interpretation of the law led to legal hermeneutics, the third traditional branch (Bleicher 13).

Schleiermacher is considered to be the first systematic hermeneutical thinker. As mentioned before, his system is a methodological one, a set of procedures by which to avoid misunderstanding. Before Schleiermacher, discourse centers around understanding and lack of understanding. Hermeneutics as method is not deployed constantly, but only in situations where we cannot understand the text. Interpretation as hermeneutic praxis comes to our aid when understanding fails (189). For Schleiermacher, however, misunderstanding (not lack of understanding) is a constant possibility -- our understanding 'naturally' errs (191).

We avoid misunderstanding through the use of 'canons' or principles of interpretation, which cover both grammar and psychology. The grammatical canons are not particularly controversial, for example requiring that we interpret a problematic word based on the context in which it occurs. Schleiermacher's very first canon, however, has significantly broader scope: "Everything that needs a fuller determination in a given text may only be determined in reference to the field of language shared by the author and his original public" (Bleicher 14). This 'psychological' dimension is the most innovative aspect of Schleiermacher's thought. As already mentioned, Schleiermacher promotes a conception of the 'hermeneutic circle' as a back-and-forth movement of understanding between part and whole. This circle is not only textual but also psychohistorical; that is, it encompasses the historical context of the author of the text and somehow 'intends' a historical 'whole' that is itself not given (TM 196). This privileging of the position of the interpreter over the text and author makes possible Schleiermacher's contention that the interpreter can understand an author better than the author understood herself (Bleicher 15).

Dilthey 'carries on' Schleiermacher's project to the extent that his his object is no longer a text but history as a whole, and his goal is no longer a praxis of textual interpretation but a methodology for the *Geisteswissenschaften* or human sciences as a whole. Alternately, we can say that historical reality is understood textually (TM 203). As mentioned in the introduction, hermeneutics for Dilthey would lead to objective 'universal history'. In a statement that will influence Heidegger, historical knowledge for Dilthey is not merely the collection of historical facts but is rather made possible by humanity's essential historicity. That is, because humans are historical -- we both understand our existence in terms of a past out of which we emerge and create history through our actions -- we can also discover the world historically. As Dilthey himself writes: "the first condition of possibility of a science of history is that I myself am a historical being, that the person studying history is the person making history" (225). If knowledge of history is based on a basic sameness between man and history, the question then becomes, how can humans as historically situated beings transcend our historical situatedness and achieve objective historical knowledge?

Dilthey answers that this achievement is possible through reflection with a dose of self-awareness. The 'historical' thinker must neither only understand the past in terms of her own contemporary criteria nor become a mere uncritical vessel for tradition that is merely passed on in the same state as before. Instead, she reflects on her own position in relation to both present concerns and tradition and thus comes to understand herself within that relation. Historical consciousness in the Diltheyan sense is thus a type of self-knowledge (237). This fact is consistent with Dilthey's location of the distinctive mark of the *Geisteswissenschaften* in Erlebnis or 'lived experience' as well as his characterization of his thought explicitly as a 'philosophy of life' (Lebensphilosophie) (Beiser 330). 'Life' for Dilthey is neither a transcendent cosmic force, an individual imaginative spark, nor an exclusively biological concept; rather, it refers to the totality of interacting social and historical human forms (355-6), which we interpret not *as* a totality but in specific concrete expressions (Lebens\"ausserungen), be they linguistic or physical (349). Given that Dilthey maintained that the apprehnsion of the whole was somehow possible, he still operates within the framework of the Schleiermachian hermeneutic circle, arriving at perfect understanding through alternation between part and [intended] whole.

THE RISE OF HERMENEUTIC CONSCIOUSNESS
As we saw above, Heidegger is critical of any such 'objectivizing' tendency in hermeneutics, which in fact constitutes a misunderstanding of understanding itself. He also criticizes Dilthey's reliance on an unclarified concepts of life (Leben) and the experience (Erlebnis) which derives from it, writing that the phrase 'philosophy of life' "says about as much as "the botany of plants"" (BT 46). Heidegger does not begin from 'life' but from the facticity of Dasein "which cannot be based on or derived from anything else" (TM 255). For Heidegger the existential analytic of Dasein is a necessary means to an end toward fundamental ontology, so he doesn't consider what we might call the 'practical' implications of his new understanding of understanding. Gadamer not only works out a more concrete sense of Heidegger's [pre-]understanding but also raises again the original hermeneutic problem of how to interpret.

We remember that for Heidegger all understanding is pre-understanding because it is based on projection (Heidegger's hermeneutic circle, not Schleiermacher's). Gadamer concretizes this formal structure through an exploration of the constitution of pre-understanding (or fore-projection). Specifically, pre-understanding is constituted by custom and tradition, which have always already constrained and determined the possibilities of Being for any individual Dasein (TM 264). Our interpretative encounter with a text is also an encounter with our own fore-projection to the extent that it is continually challenged by the text and must then be revised. Our interpretation is nevertheless guided by the text to the extent that we allow our fore-projections to be so challenged. There is nothing organically valid or interpretatively primary about my own fore-conceptions; for this reason "it is quite right for the interpreter not to approach the text directly, relying solely on the foremeaning already available to him, but rather explicitly to examine the legitimacy -- i.e., the origin and validity -- of the foremeanings dwelling within him" (280).

Thus the interpreter's task is not, as in Schleiermacher, to "forget all fore-meanings", but rather "to remain open to the meaning of the other person or text" (281). According to Gadamer, it will not be possible for an interpreter who remains open in this way to arrive at an incorrect interpretation, since such 'incorrectness' depends on stubbornly insisting on a fore-meaning that is not appropriate to the text. He thus stakes out an ambivalent position on the subject of prejudice. On the one hand, as we've already seen, prejudice can prevent us from understanding. At the same time, prejudice is a necessary condition for our understanding anything at all. Gadamer's exact stance on prejudice becomes clearer in light of his criticism of the Enlightenment and Romantic conceptions of prejudice, which for him are essentially two sides of the same coin.

PREJUDICE, ENLIGHTENMENT, ROMANTICISM, TRADITION
Gadamer writes that "the fundamental prejudice of the Enlightenment is the prejudice against prejudice itself" (283) This 'prejudice against prejudice' is a rejection of all forms of traditional authority. All claims of tradition are to be subjected to the judgment of individual reason. Historically, as noted above, it corresponds with the Protestant Reformation, which rejected the dogmatic authority of the Catholic Church. While an opinion which comes to us from tradition is not necessarily false, it must be rationally judged so that its truth or falsehood can be determined. A qualification of this standpoint is that anything traditional that fails the test of reason is not immediately discarded as nonsense but can be understood historically, i.e. in terms of the different, non-rational standards of the past society.

The Romantic critique of the Enlightenment takes, on its face, precisely the opposite position, in which "the world of myth, unreflective life, not yet analyzed away by consciousness, in "a society close to nature", [and] the world of Christian chivalry ... acquire a romantic magic, even a priority over truth" (286). Tradition acquires value simply for having already been. To the extent that Romanticism celebrates traditional society as somehow lying outside the judgmental bounds of reason, it accepts the Enlightenment's basic division between reason and tradition. In this way romanticism, rather than the Enlightenment, leads to the rise of historical consciousness, since "nonsensical tradition, which had been the exception, has become the rule" (287). Gadamer rejects both these approaches; as based on the prejudice against prejudice, they have fundamentally misunderstood prejudice.

Both the Enlightenment and Romantic positions start from the rational subject, who either embraces his rationalism or rejects it in favor of lost tradition. Gadamer, like Heidegger, questions whether our subjectivity is the proper starting point for understanding prejudice. Heidegger sees the idea of the rational subject as metaphysical baggage which distracts us from our more primordial there-being. Gadamer, more 'historically' oriented, sees subjectivity as relatively insignificant in comparison to the vastness of tradition that has already shaped us:

Long before we understand ourselves through the process of self-examination, we understand ourselves in a self-evident way in the family, society, and state in which we live ... The self-awareness of the individual is only a flickering in the closed circuits of historical life. *That is why the prejudices of the individual, far more than his judgments, constitute the historical reality of his being*. 289

For Gadamer this 'traditional constitution' of the individual should not be viewed negatively, as a mere constrant, but positively, as a necessary condition for our being. It is worth pointing out here that the Gadamerian term usually translated into English as "tradition" is \"Uberlieferung, which has a much broader sense than the English 'tradition' or the Indonesian 'adat'. It refers to literally everthing which 'comes down to us' from the past. As such, it should not be understood in the narrower sense of the conflicts between modern and traditional consciousness in for example the Balai Pustaka ANd Poedjangga Baroe eras. Another way to say this is that our 'primary' relationship with tradition is not one of conflict or restraint but rather as a part of us that we don't even question (294).

This 'traditional' element is in fact what distinguishes the human sciences from the natural. The natural sciences are not 'historical' in the same way because there is a definite direction to scientific discovery and a notion of progress. We can take as an example Copernicus' heliocentric model of the of the solar system. In the history of science it was an essential step forward from earlier geocentric models, but to a scientist of today Copernicus' model is merely a historical curiosity. It is not contemporarily relevant because it has been disproven; it is simply and unambiguously wrong. Discoveries or achievements in the human sciences, by contrast, don't experience the same obsolescence. The dialogues of Plato or the dramas of Sophocles still speak to us and have not been superseded the way Copernicus' model has. This occurs because "scientific research as such derives the law of its development ... from the law of the object it is investigating", -- in our example, the solar system -- whereas the human sciences have no such external object (295).

The upshot of this difference is that the 'objects' of the human sciences -- in our case literary texts -- remain open to us in a way that past scientific discoveries do not. A literary text that is read over years and centuries will be interpreted differently at different times and in different places. Our concrete historical situation, whatever it is, is uniquely receptive to 'hear' a text in a certain way. Furthermore, this continual process of [re]interpretation cannot be conceived to have a definite endpoint. The idea of someone at any time achieving the ultimate interpretation of *Hamlet* is absurd, especially because we cannot imagine in what future contexts that play will be read or performed. By contrast, a 'final solution' for physics in the form of a unified field theory is at least conceivable, even if it may be practically unachievable.

It is for this same reason that we can't speak as easily of 'objects' in the human sciences as we do in the natural sciences. When we perform historical or literary 'research' we are not simply adding a fact or two to the total store of knowledge in the way a chemistry experiement does. Rather, we are both engaging with and continuing the tradition which comes down to us. As Gadamer writes, "the theme and object of research are actually constituted by the motivation of the inquiry ... [whereas] the object of the natural sciences can be described ideally as what would be known in the perfect knowledge of nature, it is senseless to speak of a perfect knowledge of history" (296). Our own historicity, the defining feature of which is our radical finitude, makes that impossible.

Gadamer also offers a further development of the hermeneutic circle. As we remember, for Schleiermacher the hermeneutic circle refers to the part-whole movement of the interpreter. Objectively the circle manifests on several levels, for example between an individual word and its sentence, between an individual work and the entirety of the author's work, or between the author's work and an entire genre, or literature as a whole. Subjectively, a text is an expression of the psyche of the author, and this second type of hermeneutic movement is equally necessary for Schleiermacher, as we can only achieve true understanding when we have transposed ourselves into the subject-position of the author. For Gadamer, this is an inaccurate model of what happens in understanding. When we engage in dialogue with someone, our dialogue is always about some matter or thing. The aim of our dialogue is to reach a common understanding about that thing, not to understand the subjectivity of the other person (unless we are a psychoanalyst) (303). Objectively, Schleiermacher's reduction of understanding to historical understanding (whereby a text can *only* be understood within its own context) is tantamount to rejecting the possibility of meaningful understanding. Schleiermacher's hermeneutics is a "universal[ization of] historical consciousness" (304).

In Schleiermacher interpretation moves textually, either within one text or between related ones. In the case of Heidegger the interpretative movement is between text and fore-understanding. If, as we saw, this fore-understanding is constituted by tradition, Heidegger's recasting of the circle can be read as an affirmation of the traditional context the existence which makes it possible for texts to be meaningful for us at all and which Schleiermacher's hermeneutics denies. More than that, "[t]radition is not simply a permanent preconditon; rather, we produce it ourselves inasmuch as we understand, participate in the evolution of tradition, and hence further determine it ourselves" (305). Once again, we misunderstand tradition if we view it as something outside of ourselves; it is in us, we are it, and we shape it through our thought and action. It provides the "fundamental, enabling prejudices" for our understanding; furthermore, tradition is not "unquestioned unaninimity"  (306). Rather, there is always tension "in the play between the traditionary text's strangeness and familiarity to us, between being a historically intended, distanced object and belonging to tradition" (ibid). We misread Gadamer if we view him only as a promoter of rigid tradition uncritically received.

This in-betweenness in which we find ourselves makes the further development of a 'procedure of understanding' impossible. Such a methodological orientation would assume a position both outside of and superior to tradition. Instead, our prejudices are always with us and not necessarily available to us to remove as we desire. Another way to say this is that history "both determines in advance what seems to us worth inquiring about and what will appear as an object of investigation" (311). The 'history' referred to here is Gadamer's famous "history of effect" (Wirkungsgeschichte). While we can't become consciously aware of everything which historically shapes us, we can be aware of the process in general; indeed, what Gadamer calls 'hermeneutic consciousness' depends on this awareness, or 'consciousness of the history of effect" (wirkungsgeschichtliches Bewusstsein).

Essential to this consciousness is our awareness of our possessing a distinct historical horizon, a term which has multiple resonances for Gadamer. Horizon first of all refers to our range of vision; we can only see that which lies within it. Things outside our horizon simply do not appear to us. F. Budi Hardiman observes to toher key aspects of horizon: firstly, a horizon is not static but moves with us. We cannot move to our horizon's 'edge' without moving the horizon itself. Secondly and relatedly, a horizon is not closed off to things outside of it but possesses a basic openness. The openness of our horizon is also its lack of completeness; insofar as we and those around us are constantly shaping that horizon simply by living, the horizon is better thought of as in process than as a fixed entity (HARDIMAN CITATION).

Gadamer's conception of horizon stands in sharp contrast to that of Schleiermacher. Implicit in Schleiermacher's proposal that we must occupy the horizon of the author in order to understand her text is the idea that a horizon constitutes a closed totality. Everything within that horizon is meaningful *only* in terms within that horizon and meaningless outside of it. If we try to visualize this process, we can imagine the interpreter removing her horizon as if it were a pair of glasses and then 'putting on' the horizon of the author, by which we are then able to understand. Such an approach is both impossible and mistaken: impossible because our horizon is not available to us as an object in that way, and mistaken because it assumes the impossibility of the text being meaningful for us today. Instead, what occurs in understanding is a "fusion of horizons" (Horizontverschmelzung) (317), made possible by horizon's inherent openness. As noted before, our horizon is unfinished, but so is the horizon of the traditional text: it remains open to us, and it too is shaped by our continual reinterpretation.

Although he refuses to establish anything like a fixed methodology for the human sciences, Gadamer does discuss the act of interpretation more concretely. Alongside understanding and interpretation, hermeneutics includes a third, 'forgotten' but necessary element: application. As we see above, every understanding involves an application of the text to our present situation, not as an ancillary step but as a constitutive moment equiprimordial with interpretation and understanding. The classic example of this necessity of application is the Greek oracle. The oracle gives a prophecy in the form of a riddle that is at first either incomprehensible or misunderstood by the hearer. As Alenka Zupancic insightfully observes, Oedipus is not a hapless victim of the preannounced fate that he will kill his father and marry his mother; rather, that prophecy lacks realy force without his supplementary interpretative action. He fulfills the prophecy himself (Zupancic 166). Furthermore, the prophecy only makes sense when applied to his life in that moment. The interpreter for Gadamer is in the same liminal position as the oracle: only she understands 'both sides' of the conversation, and her duty is to give not a literal translation but rather one appropriate to the hearer (TM 319).

The difficult thing about application is that it is never a simple application of a general principle to a specific case, as we find in mathematics, for example. Gadamer sees legal hermeneutics as the exemplar of the difficulty of application. Interpretation of a literary text may not have any immediate 'stakes', but the law is another matter. The law makes a claim that must be responded to in that moment. A judge handing down a sentence knows the text of the law and is likely aware of the intention of the author of the law in its original context, but this general or background knowledge does not in itself provide the correct interpretation when faced with the specific case. The judge's sentence is an interpretation that mediates the law and the present case. The 'truth' of the law is not available as an object prior to the act of judgment. Rather, that truth "must be understood ... *as* this mediation" (338). Not only is the truth only present as mediating application, but this act also further determines the tradition going into the future. For Gadamer legal hermeneutics is the exemplary case of the foundational status of application: theological and philological hermeneutics, and thus hermeneutics generally, follow the exact same structure.

In conclusion, then, we learn from Gadamer that 'objectivity' in reading a traditional text is neither possible nor desirable. It is impossible because of the fore-structure of understanding constituted by tradition. It is undesirable because even striving after objective interpretation after the manner of the natural sciences functions, as we've seen, to flatten out the history that allows texts to speak to us, instead rendering them inert, 'merely' historical. The abandonment of the quest for objectivity is not a surrender to the 'whim' of 'anything-goes' subjective judgment. As I hope has been clear since the discussion of the early Heidegger, this analysis seeks to operate at some remove from the problematic of subject and object. Instead of the scientific positing of a 'material object' my inquiry will proceed as a dialogue with the text, a dialogue which has the structure of question and answer. At the same time, this thesis does not represent that dialogic process of coming to an understanding; it is rather a kind of report from the 'far side' of that dialogue, after it has reached a satisfactory stopping point. The goal of the dialogue has been the discovery, to paraphrase Gadamer, of the question to which *Arus Balik* is the answer. I will now proceed to lay that question out, to show how *Arus Balik* answers it, and to demonstrate why *Arus Balik* as that answer to that question should matter to us today.

