
The general 'course' of Heidegger's thought is well-known: first, an earlier "existential-phenomenological" stage (sometimes called Heidegger I, a periodization coined by William J. Richardson) centered on *Being and Time*; then, sometime in or throughout the 30's and 40's, the 'turn', followed by 'the late Heidegger' or "Heidegger II" concerned with the deconstruction of metaphysics, the recovery of ancient Greek 'pre-metaphysical' thought, the critique of technology, and a celebration of 'thinking' over 'philosophy' which entails a problematization of language itself manifesting in a more 'mystical' and 'obscurantist' prose style. This later stage is spread over a vast number of texts, the publication and translation of which is still ongoing. While the earlier Heidegger's 'hermeneutic' insight provided us with an approach to the literary text other than that of the sciences, it is the later Heidegger's "history of Being" that allows us to think both the problem of epochal transition in *Arus Balik* and, relatedly, Pramoedya's poetic role as our epochal contemporary. The second  (though arguably prior) hypothesis of this study then becomes that we do in fact live an the era following metaphysical closure beginning sometime in the 20th century, dominated by a an all-encompassing technology which nevertheless offers a unique opportunity for a kind of thinking (and thus of being and acting) different from any that has come before. There are many accounts available of Heidegger's later thought*, but my approach here is heavily and primarily indebted to Reiner Sch\"urmann's *Heidegger on Being and Acting: from Principles to Anarchy*, a text I've already had occasion to cite multiple times. We will situate ourselves in Sch\"urmann's terms.

According to the hypothesis of metaphysical closure, the history of the West (which eventually becomes the history of the world) can be read in its metaphysics; this metaphysics has a definite beginning and end: it begins with the ancient Greeks, passes through medieval and modern forms, and ends with Friedrich Nietzsche. Sch\"urmann defines metaphysics as "the title for that ensemble of speculative efforts with a view to a model, a canon, a *principium* for action" (HBA 4). Though its content varies, the formal structure of metaphysics is always an attempt to look beyond what appears to us to some ultimate referent with which to justify or regulate human behavior. In this sense, the pre-Socratic philosophers are 'pre-metaphysical' because their thought is concerned with *phusis* ("that which arises", "the arising of that which arises") itself, and not what lies beyond it (Gray 98). Metaphysics proper begins with Plato and Aristotle. The paradigmatic notion of metaphysical grounding is Aristotle's pros hen (relation to the one).

The pros hen is originally a *physicalist* concept which understands all differences in motion, rest, form, etc. as modifications of one basic substance, *ousia* (HBA 38). All entities are 'accidents' or 'predicates' of substance. When Aristotle thinks politically, he tranposes this substantialist understanding into the political realm (defined by Sch\"urmann (36) as the public intersection of words, things, and actions), with individuals viewed as accidents of the polis and oriented towards its happiness, which may or may not coincide with their own individual happiness (87, 329-30n36). Long after metaphysics and politics are no longer thought in a strictly Aristotelian manner, this pros hen structure remains; as a result, the political "appears as the domain where the integrative force of one metaphysical referent -- e.g. "the supraseneory World, the Ideas, God, the moral Law, the authority of Reason, Progress, the Happiness of the greatest number, Culture, Civilization"-- becomes apparent in the conjunction of words, things, and deeds" (88, internal quote HW 204). Everything is both referred back to and oriented towards whatever principial 'one' is in place at the time. This subordination of things to a principle that is considered transcendent is the essence of metaphysics, precisely what Heidegger seeks to deconstruct.

The deconstruction of the history of metaphysics rests on the fact that metaphysics *is* historical. Every metaphysical era is grounded by a referent, thus making each in a sense *structurally* similar, but concretely, Aristotle's *ousia*, the Middle Ages' God, Leibniz's principle of sufficient reason, and Nietzsche's will to power ground very different 'aletheiological constellations' or 'economies of presencing', in Sch\"urmann's terms. The more synchronic 'aletheiological constellation' emphasizes the arrangement of entities in [un]concealment in any given period, while the more diachronic 'economy of presencing' emphasizes presence as an event nevertheless 'economically' regulated -- here meant in its etymological sense of 'nomos of oikos', that is, law regulating our household, our way of living. Sch\"urmann also uses the adjective 'epochal' in describing these shifting arrangements. We can take 'epoch' here in its standard sense of referring to a point in or period of time, but we should not lose sight of its Greek root verb *epechein*, to hold back. In this sense each *transition* between orders of presencing is epochal because it witholds itself (we are not aware of the transition when it occurs but only afterwards); each order itself is also epochal insofar as it is aletheiological, that is, witholding.

Things come to presence differently, are regulated in different ways, in different eras. The fixed divine order dependent on God, for example, is to the Middle Ages as the ceaseless self-overcoming of the will to power is to our own 'postmodern' era. Although the principles that ground an era appear for Heidegger most clearly in philosophical writings (35), this does not mean that philosophers or their ideas cause different aletheiological constellations to establish themselves. In fact, the arrival, persistence, and passing away of each of the eras of metaphysical history is a self-establishing process that occurs regardless of human agency. This is Heidegger's 'anti-humanism'. If Nietzsche's thought uniquely corresponds to our era of technological domination, it is not because his thought somehow influenced enough people to 'put his ideas into practice'. Rather, Nietzsche himself was merely uniquely receptive to what was already occurring anyway. Both poets and thinkers possess this receptivity -- poetry and thinking are 'the same' in the sense of belonging together, but not identical (WCT 241) --  but poetry gains an increasing priority for Heidegger after his turn. This priority is on the one hand a result of the metaphysical closure, that is, the end of a philosophy that has run its course. More essentially, though, poets indicate another way for us to think, be, and act, one only possible after that closure.

Our postmodern era is dominated by technology and metaphysically articulated by Nietzsche. The 'essence' of technology is *Gestell* or 'enframing', in which everything that exists is tranformed into 'stock' or 'reserve'(QCT 19). The planet earth; its air, water, plants and animals; the sun and the weather, all become mere material only meaningful insofar as it can be exploited. Even human beings become 'human resources' (Thomson 60). Sch\"urmann calls this state of affairs, in which "subjectivity [is] the unassailable metaphysical principle ... the triumph of *teleology* over presencing" (187); this reference to teleology once again recalls Aristotle. As we saw before, Aristotle's politics is a translation of his physics. Entities are understood to spring from an arche or principle which determine their being and thus orient them toward a telos or end goal (Leclerc 107) In politics, the polis is the source of humans, and its happiness is their end. For the Nietzschean will to power, though, "every telos ... turns into its obstacle; erected by the will itself, but for the sake of being overcome" (HBA 189). The Aristotelian telos was a conception of the good. For the will to power, a telos is just a tool for its own actualization. Nietzsche foresaw this situation well before it factically came to pass when he wrote in the 1880's that "die W\"uste w\"achst", 'the wasteland grows'(WCT 29).

The will to power is paired with another Nietzschean concept, the eternal return of the same: given infinite time, all possible things and events have occurred an infinite number of times. Heidegger refers to the unity of the will to power and the eternal return as the "will to will" (IP 60). Under the 'temporality' of the eternal return, presencing's inherent motility -- its arising, persisting, and passing away -- is neutralized against a 'background' of endless sameness. Everything is made constantly available by technology, which is tantamount to the annihilation of temporality itself. It is for this reason that Heidegger writes that "the self-assertion of technological objectification is the constant negation of death" (PLT 122). Postmodern humans, deprived of any temporal 'sense' of being, no longer have any relationship to the world besides subjective domination. Nevertheless, this domination is itself a form of submission to our contemporary economy of presencing: "Man can appear in the posture of a legislator over entities only epochally;  such is the paradox this phenomenology of economies reveals. He is epocahlly summoned to summon entities so that they conform to his reason. By so doing, he guards one aletheiological constellation. *Man responds* to the destinal injunctions by ordaining *entities to be answerable* to him" (HBA 227). This is a crucial point: the aletheiological constellation grounded by the will to will is not itself an object of human willing, but rather something that precedes us and comes to us.

Technology, however, is not total desolation. Heidegger often quotes H\"olderlin in this regard: "But where there is the danger, there grows / Also what saves" (205). At the end of metaphysics another way of being becomes possible for the first time: 'anarchy', not in its received political sense but rather as an-archy, presencing not subordinated to a principle (5). This type of being is only possible as the 'other thinking' which takes its example from the Presocratic attending to phusis, not as 'nature' or 'substance', but as 'what arises'. It depends upon the transformation of the 'a priori willing' of postmodernity into an 'a priori letting' in the sense of legein outlined above (250). It is impossible to outline what the social reality of such a being would look like from our perspective within technologocial enframing except negatively in that it would be characterized by "the absence of systemic violence" (275). Poetry helps to bring about this other thinking, not through making any sort of critique, either implicit or explicit, nor through laying out a program of action for 'social change', but simply by saying what is: "Poets teach us how to dwell on the earth because their language is concrete and exact ... keeping us near the earth and attentive to the real powers that dominate our lives" (Gray 103). This sober attention allows both thinking and poetry to "corrode teleocracy as rust from gentle rain corrodes iron" (HBA 280).

Pramoedya was an Indonesian poet. He wrote in Indonesian for an Indonesian audience and was very much concerned that his writing (as well as the writing of others) be relevant to the Indonesian people (Heinschke 167). However, neither Indonesia nor Nusantara have ever existed independently in the world, something we shall see attested to in Pramoedya's fiction. The defining features of his artistic life -- his long imprisonment on Buru where his great novels were written, the banning of many of those novels upon publication, and his subsequent life under house arrest and constant state harrassment -- were a result of his broadly leftist sympathies which manifested as an opposition to the globalization of Indonesia, its opening up to market capitalism under the Soeharto regime. Nevertheless, the novels themselves are the farthest imaginable from polemic screeds. The Buru tetralogy, Arok Dedes, and our focus here, Arus Balik, present us the details of life in their respective times and places in a basically neutral tone.

"Poetry is the original admission of dwelling" (PLT 225), but because the medium of poetry is always a specific language, dwelling thus admitted is never abstract or universal but always historically and culturally situated. Indonesian poetry, poetry in the Indonesian language, has its own complicated history as a learned language for most of its speakers and writers. Pramoedya, in raising the decisive moments in [pre]Indonesian history, has something to tell us about Indonesian dwelling. In looking back into history he nevertheless remains our metaphysical contemporary; as Gadamer shows, any retrospective reading implies a certain level of projection of our own concerns back onto the period in question, letalone when the work in question is literature and not historical scholarship. This is a benefit and not a disadvantage. Ultimately we read *Arus Balik* not to learn about post-Majapahit Nusantara but about ourselves.
