
THE QUESTION AND THE HYPOTHESIS
The previous section broadly considered the 'methodological' problem of reading a literary text. Through the thought of the early Heidegger and Gadamer, we concluded that the very positing of a 'methodology' in the 'scientific' sense represents a fundamental misapprehension of of the work of literature and art in general. As an alternative we posit a 'dialogic' approach whereby my own prejudices (themselves not available to me as objects) revise themselves both productively and negatively in question-and-answer with the text. The limits of this dialogue are determined by my own horizon and the horizon of the text. The validity of my interpretation depends not on the extent to which it accurately applies a pre-given theory to a text as object, but rather to the extent that it allows us to hear something from the text, not as something distant, foreign, and obsolete, but rather as something that continues to address us in our being today. With the ground so cleared we can begin to approach the text itself.

The proper question for Arus Balik is:
How does Pramoedya think epochal transition in *Arus Balik*?

A related question, possibly the same:
How does Pramoedya think the political --the public relation of words, deeds, and things-- in *Arus Balik*?

My 'hypothesis' is not a 'jawaban sementara' to these questions; I understand hypothesis in the more primordial sense of "the situation of the foundation, that which is already given to and lies before [for example] the mathemeticians: the odd, the even, the shapes, the angles" (WCT 201). The hypothesisgrounds the inquiry such that the same inquiry with a different hypothesis (such as we might conceive in the 'scientific' model of literary 'research') is unimaginable. The hypothesis of this paper is that Pramoedya is a 'poet' in the Heideggerian sense. This sense of poet and of poetry must first be laid out.

First of all, 'poetry' in Heidegger is not simply literature in verse, and a poet is not simply someone who writes such verse. Rather, poetry (as well as 'thinking') is "work of the word", one of several types of work which bring about 'unconcealment' (Unverborgenheit, IM 204/EiM 146)). 'Unconcealment' is one of Heidegger's translations of aletheia, the ancient Greek term for both truth and disclosure. Consistently and from early on in his writings, Heidegger reappropriates aletheia as a concept of truth different from our modern, 'rational' understanding -- that is, as correspondence between an assertion and an objective state of affairs (SZ 33). Etymologically, the root of aletheia is lethe: forgetfulness or concealedness. The prefix a- is a negation, hence, unconcealedness. This negative structure is significant: there is no total unconcealment understood as absolute presence in aletheia, but rather always a dual counter-movement of concealment/unconcealment (Sch\"urmann HBA 173). In every act of appropriating unconcealment, something also withdraws. So, for example, any revealing by means of language is also at the same time a covering-up; every explanation also obfuscates. This moment of inherent withdrawal stands in sharp contrast to the modern paradigm of the rational subject which seizes objects to set them before itself in knowledge, indeed posits itself as the underlying substrate by which everything 'outside' the subject is said to be at all. One way in which Heidegger discusses the movement of [un-]concealment is in the opposition between 'world' and 'earth' is his essay "The Origin of the Work of Art", an opposition that is also significant for our understanding of poetry.

WORLD AND EARTH
The concept of world in "Origin" is not identical to that put forward in *Being and Time*, but the two resonate. We recall that 'world' in *Being and Time* designated the referential totality of the the ready-to-hand implicitly present in all equipment. Here, the world retains this sense of non-objective 'contextuality" (Sch\"urmann 211) but takes on a more 'mystical' dimension: "The world is the self-disclosing openness of the broad paths of the simple and essential decisions in the destiny of an historical people" (PLT 47). Leaving aside for now the parsing of "essential decisions", "destiny", and "historical people", we can see that the world retains its status as an a priori for meaningfulness. Elsewhere, he states that "the world worlds" (43); in this worlding "all things gain their lingering and hastening, their remoteness and nearness, their scope and limits" (44). In its role of structuring the meaningful context of humans in their collective life, the world is on the side of disclosure or unconcealment. A world is "set up" (aufgestellt) by the work of art (PLT 46/Hw 36). At the same time, whereas *Being and Time* emphasizes the mutual constitution of Dasein and world, here, the 'worlding' of the world implies a certain degree of worldly autonomy and a concomitant displacement of the human from the central disclosive position it occupied previously (we will further discuss this 'decentering of the human' below).

Earth, by contrast, is "the spontaneous forthcoming of that which is continually self-secluding and to that extent sheltering and concealing" (PLT 47); the "ground on which and in which man bases his dwelling"; and "the sheltering agent" present "in the things that arise" (41). Earth, which is "set forth" (hergestellt (Hz 36) by the work of art, is on the side of concealment, the concealing motion that accompanies and counters any worldly disclosure. It is not, strictly speaking, a 'physical' or material concept. According to Gadamer, the advent of 'earth' in Heidegger's thought is a major breakthrough, an irruption of the poetic into his heretofore philosophical language stemming from his own close readings of poetry (specifically that of Friedrich H\"olderlin) and tinging his thought with a certain paganism (Ways 99). World and earth are contradictory forces wich are ever in conflict: "The world grounds itself on the earth, and earth juts through world" (PLT 47). The 'truth' of the work of art in the sense of aletheia is the simultaneous concealing/unconcealing of world and earth, both of which manifest through and around it. Poetry can be considered in the narrow sense as a type of this artistic work via the medium of language, but also more broadly as poiesis or 'making' which precedes all art as its 'essence'.

POETRY
Poetry (Dichtung, which can also mean 'thickening' or 'rendering dense' (HBA 12)) in the broad sense is "the saying of the unconcealedness of what is" (PLT 71). This 'saying' is not an act of factical speaking or writing but rather a kind of general linguistic capacity that is actualized in a given language. Poesy (Poesie) is the work of poets, the act of writing or saying verse, and thus poetry in the narrow sense. This conception of poetry has a connection to Heidegger's understanding of the Greek legein, the verb of which logos is the noun. In modern times we understand logos as speech, specifically as the ordering predicative statements or 'logic' which forms the basis of our sciences, be they 'natural', 'social', or 'human'. Heidegger contends that legein has a more primal meaning than speech for the Pre-Socratic thinkers, particularly Parmenides, the first recorded thinker in the Western tradition to raise the issue of legein at all. In the Presocratic context, legein refers to 'laying' -- specifically "laying before" (vorlegen) or laying out (darlegen), (WCT 198). In the epic tradition of Homer, legein has a similar sense, namely as gathering, for example of "twigs for a fire or pieces of enemy armor before Troy" (HBA 175). Legein can thus be understood as a kind of pre-linguistic disclosive capacity that Heidegger terms 'poetry' and is an essential aspect of all art*. The two 'levels' of poetry then mirror the two levels of legein. However, the relationship between narrow, written poesy and poetry in the sense above is not one of simple derivation.


Heidegger writes:
"Language itself is poetry in the essential sense. But since language is the happening in which for man beings first disclose themselves to him each time as beings, poesy--or poetry in the narrower sense--is the most original form of poetry in the essential sense. Language is not poetry because it is the primal poesy; rather, poesy takes place in language because language preserves the original nature of poetry". PLT 72
I follow Sandra Lee Bartky in reading this apparent contradiction as expressing a distinction between what me might call 'chronological' and 'logical' priority* between the two types of poetry (Bartky 222). Logically, 'essential' pre-linguistic poetry precedes any concrete manifestation of it as 'poesy'. Chronologically, however, in order to found a people's historical self-consciousness (the canonical example is the poetry of Homer for the Greeks), poetry must in the first place exist as poesy, that is, as something concretely spoken or written. It is in light of this chronological fact that poetry-as-mere-poesy enjoys a certain priority over the other arts. This priority comes from poetry's unique 'material', language. Language is "the house of being" because "we reach what is by constantly going through" it (PLT 129); that is, it is only through the medium of language that beings appear to us in the first place. A poet is one who "dare[s] language" (ibid), an artist whose medium is language, though not necessarily verse. Needless to say, not all who 'work' with language qualify as poets in this sense.

A poet's work simultaneously discloses a world and "brings man onto the earth, making him belong to it, and thus brings him into dwelling" (216). This work always occurs in a specific language (and thus within a specific cultural context) and at a specific time (and thus within a specific historical context). While the linguistic aspect of Pramoedya's work will come out more in our analysis, in order to say more about the specifically historical task of the poet for us today we will need to look first at the discovery that prompted Heidegger's 'turn' (Kehre), namely, that "presencing has a history" (HBA 271). As we will see, in the light of this discovery, Pramoedya remains our contemporary.



*to forestall an obvious objection, Heidegger does not retain this world-disclosive claim for everything that can be labeled art; rather, "only [great] art is under consideration here" (39). Given the directness of the above quote, it is baffling that Roger A. Shiner could read Heidegger in this essay as claiming that "every literary work ... creates a world" (Shiner 29).

*my own somewhat awkward formulation

